[Music]
morning to you uh welcome to breakfast
with charlie state and louise minchin
our headlines today the coded vaccine
rollout moves into its next phase in the
uk
after the home secretary the health
secretary confirms the most vulnerable
groups
have all been offered a jab there are
tough rules for anyone arriving
in the uk from high-risk countries from
today a 10-day
hotel quarantine with travelers footing
the bill
good morning here at heathrow the first
passengers are due to leave the airport
to begin their 10 days
in isolation but how does the system
work i'll explain
a little later and the duke and duchess
of sussex announced they're expecting
their second child
it is hard going for england's
cricketers in chennai they take
early wickets in the second test but the
indian captain
virat kohli scores a half century to
help extend their lead to almost
400. good morning this week's weather
quite different from last week's we're
looking at a lot of mild conditions
very mild for some of us there'll be
rain and it will often be windy but
we're not expecting much frost at all
out of all the details later in the
programme
[Music]
good morning it's monday the 15th of
february our top story today england's
coveted vaccine rollout is officially
entering a new phase today
with over 65s and the clinically
vulnerable now being invited to get
their first jam
um in the past few minutes we heard that
the government has kept its promise to
offer a jab to the four
groups most at risk from the virus
here's our health correspondent laura
foster
it started here in coventry with
margaret keenan
and over the last two months the biggest
vaccination program in nhs history
went from a single shot to more than 15
million doses
across the uk all administered by
healthcare staff
and volunteers may parsons who gave the
very first injection
says she hadn't anticipated that moment
to get so much attention
it was a phenomenal part of our history
obviously
uh 2020 has been really dark and sad and
you know soul breaking and
the fact that we've managed to actually
offer these it's something that
everyone needed but vaccinations aren't
just being administered in hospitals
gp surgeries and pharmacies pop-up
centers in sports venues and museums
helped reach this milestone
it has been a truly national uk wide
effort we've done it together and i want
to thank each and every person who has
helped
make it happen the majority of these
vaccinations will be made up of people
from the four
priority groups the over 70s frontline
health and social care workers
the clinically extremely vulnerable and
care home staff and residents
but that doesn't mean everyone in the
four groups has had the vaccine
we'll get more figures for each group
this afternoon
for now the message is that if you've
been left behind
it's not too late if somebody for
whatever reason hasn't yet
uh chosen to do so this is an offer that
still stands
so whether it's this weekend whether
it's next week whether it's the
days and weeks to come people can always
come forward
for that vaccination even if they have
not done so
up until now starting today the over 65s
and anyone considered to be clinically
vulnerable
is being officially invited to get the
vaccine
but keeping up the pace of this rollout
will get trickier over the next few
months
as the nhs will need to keep
administering doses to new groups
while making sure that those who've
already had one
come back and get their second booster
jabs
laura foster bbc news it's quite a bit
more information
on the success of the vaccine rally
emerging this morning just a few minutes
worth saying we're speaking to the
national medical director of nhs england
that's professor stephen powers
well let's uh talk now to um adam
fleming who's our political
correspondent about
all of that and we're just hearing what
they've reached their target
um you know this huge vaccination
program morning
hello there yes so we've got the
headline figures about reaching the
target but what government ministers
wants to do is
delve into the data and see how the
vaccine is really working in the real
world and particularly
how good it is at stopping people
passing the virus on
to other people because that would be a
crucial factor in how
much and how quickly you can lift the
lock down
in england and that is the subject of a
lot of discussion in the government
and because there's a discussion amongst
ministers there's lots of bits and
pieces leaking out
and lots of different opinions in the
newspapers about what should happen
when but matt hancock the health
secretary said maybe we should ignore
that
because no decisions have been made yet
there's a huge amount of speculation in
the papers
i know people want to know the answer to
when the lockdown will end and the prime
minister will set that out
next monday on the 22nd of february
we're taking those decisions this week
so we'll be looking at the data
looking at the success of the vaccine
rollout and how far that's reached and
its impact in terms of
protecting people looking at the number
of cases than
critically looking at the number of
people who are in hospital
and the number of deaths those two
factors are are vital
so what do we know ministers will look
at the latest scientific data
at the end of this week the prime
minister as we were just hearing there
will publish a plan
to parliament for lifting the lockdown
on monday he has said that broadly it
will go
schools first then outdoor activities
then retail
then hospitality and talking to people
in the government this morning they are
increasingly confident that english
pupils will be able to go back
on the 8th of march okay um adam we're
just going to keep that question in mind
all i think weak i think what do we know
thank you
anyone arriving in england from a
country with high rates of covid will
have to quarantine in a government
approved hotel from this morning at
their own expense
and for 10 days portugal brazil and
south africa are among the 33 nations on
the so-called
red list ben's following events at
heathrow for us this morning and this
came into force this early hours didn't
it ben just take us what
what you know take us through what you
know
yeah good morning to you the first
passengers just come through the doors
here to begin their 10-day stay
in isolation and a hotel just here at
heathrow
uh what they've done is arrive on a
flight it's worth saying there are no
direct flights from those redless
countries they may have come on an
indirect flight so changed somewhere
from one of those countries and then
arrived
in the uk what they will do now is be
taken from here
to a hotel to begin that stay what they
will do 10 days
in a hotel a mandatory isolation they
won't be allowed out of their room
except for a little bit of exercise or
fresh air
they will have a test a test on day two
and another one on day eight
and only if that day eight test is
negative will they be released
from that quarantine on the tenth day
they will pay
750 pounds for the privilege of that
stay
paid for by the passengers uh and
crucially of course they will not be
able to leave
anywhere else so have had to declare
themselves at the airport when they came
through immigration
and they will be stuck in that hotel now
very interesting of course
the demand for this system is not
expected to be huge as it was in
countries like australia and that is
because the government is hoping
that people have made alternative
arrangements they've decided not to
travel
or they've had a bit of time to get back
before those rules
come into force now heathrow and gatwick
expected to be the busiest
as far as that system is concerned in
scotland it's worth saying of course
that uh
any arrivals whether you're on the red
list or not will have to take that
10-day hotel
isolation but here at heathrow the first
passengers literally just coming through
the doors within the last few minutes
to begin their stay in isolation
ben thank you the duke and duchess
of sussex prince harry and his wife
megan have revealed they're expecting
a second child to announce the news with
a photograph
of megan cradling her bump while resting
her head on
harry's lap last year the duchess
revealed she'd suffered a miscarriage
during the summer
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc dot co dot uk
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with bbc news